- Alright, so in the last
video, we made some changes
so that we've now got a
multi-threaded server that should
be able to be responsive
to more than one client.
So what we're going to do is run this,
and for our first test, we wanna make sure
everything's still working.
So I'm gonna start by running the server,
and then we're going to
actually run a single client.
I'm gonna type a few
strings in just to make sure
that everything's working.
And you can see, over here on the right,
if I'm actually correctly
getting the strings
that I'm typing, echoed
back from the server,
so that's working well.
Now let's start a second client.
I'm gonna type a few
strings into that as well.
And if you recall the
last time we did that
with a single-threaded server, each client
could only type one
message and see it echoed.
Now that each client is
handled in its own thread,
the server blocking on the
accept code doesn't result
in all the clients being blocked as well.
And the same is true,
actually, when a thread
blocks on the read line
call, only that client thread
will be blocked; the other client threads
are still able to service the
clients they're connected to.
Now, just to confirm, I'll
go back to the other client.
More of the same; that's
still working okay,
and likewise,
yet another, that's still working as well.
Alright, so let's stop each client now.
I'm going to just type exit.
Let's close that one down,
and go back to the other one.
Same deal there: exit.
Okay, and we have to close the client,
the server, rather, down,
manually, so let's do that.
Terminate it.
Okay.
Now we've got a full screen
with a server code for now.
What we're gonna do now is add some code
that puts each thread
to sleep for 15 seconds.
We're gonna delete this
code that I commented out,
and we're gonna go back to our echoer,
and we're going to actually
put the code in there.
So, at the moment, we've got, below here,
the if echo string equals exit then break.
We're gonna put the code down
below that, in a try catch.
You're gonna catch interrupted exception.
Interrupted, and we're
just gonna do a thread
dot sleep, 15,000 for 15 seconds.
And so that we can see
that there's no delay
for client connexions,
we're also gonna add
a println statement to
the run method itself,
and we'll actually add
that above here, so I've,
we've got the line of output.
And on the next line, we're
just gonna print out a message,
just so we know that the
server has received it.
So received client input
colon plus echo string.
Right, so let's try running it again now.
We'll start by running the server first,
and let's actually test this now.
So I'm going to start by
testing the first client.
You can see, the server's
received that input.
We'll do another one here.
Bob, and I can go back
to the other client,
and just wait for the echo to come back,
after the 15 second delay.
There's our delay, our echo, rather.
And likewise for the second client;
Bob's come back as well.
So the point here is that
one thread taking a while
will not result in every
client being blocked until
the long-running client is
finished, which is pretty cool.
And you can actually test this out and run
as many clients as you like here.
To try it, let's just do that now.
What we're gonna do, is
we're gonna close down
our clients first.
Okay, then we're gonna
close down our server.
Terminate.
And let's get rid of the
sleep code, I'm gonna comment it out.
Now let's actually try testing this.
Let's say four clients, just to make sure
that it's still working.
Okay, and we'll run our first client.
Tim.
Received client import;
we'll run another one.
Bob.
Another one.
Percy.
Mike.
You can see, we're running
four different versions
and everything's working fine.
And you can see up here, by the way,
the number four, there on the run arrow.
That shows us that there's four clients
actually running, at the moment.
Alright, and if we go back
and just test another one.
Was here.
Bob was here.
Clearly, things are working fine.
The server's able to
came as well.
Server's able to cope
with all of these clients
without any problems.
Alright, so let's exit out of that.
We'll close down all the clients now.
Okay, that's the last.
And obviously, the server
doesn't close down automatically;
we need to close it down manually.
So hopefully, now you'll
understand why the server
doesn't terminate automatically:
just because one client wants
out, doesn't mean they all do,
and even if all the clients exit,
other clients may well want
to connect in the future,
and therefore, the server remains alive
and listening, for that reason.
Note though, that when
a client does send exit,
the thread for that client terminates.
So to confirm that, you
can actually run the server
in debug mode; so what
we want to do first,
that we wanna add a break-point
on the socket dot close statement.
So let's just close this down first,
and terminate the server.
Go to full screen again.
Go to our echoer.
And, under the socket
dot close, down here,
we wanna add a break point.
Then we're gonna run the
server in debug mode.
I'm gonna run, and debug.
Okay, so we're now running in debug mode.
Now we're gonna come
back over to the client
we're going to run to.
Okay, we have the first one going.
Tim.
We'll have another one.
Good ol' Bob again.
Alright, so I've got two clients running,
connecting to the server,
and the server's running
in debug mode, and if I actually type exit
for one of them now,
notice that we've hit the
break point for the server.
So if I continue, and I'll just go back
and close this window down again,
so we can see what's going on.
Continue by clicking on run.
And I've actually closed it down again,
so let's actually just start it up again.
I'll actually run it in debug
again; I wanted to show you
what actually happens,
but before I do that,
I'll close down the clients,
terminate that, and we'll run
this again, in debug mode.
Run, debug.
And I actually need to
close this down now,
because of the socket's still in use,
so let's go ahead and do that.
Terminate, didn't actually close it down.
Leave that break point on though,
because we wanna hit that
again, so we'll go into debug,
run, that's better, it's now connecting.
And we'll run our client again.
And run a second one.
Okay, so we've got two running again.
And again, if I type in
exit, and press enter,
the break point is hit.
So that confirms that the
code is being executed
on the server side, to close the socket
when the client has issued
the, or, has set the text,
exit, which of course was our prompt
to actually close down
the client connexion.
So now, what I wanted to do last time,
was click on continue here,
which is the continue button
over here to the left,
and you can see now that
the server is still running,
and I can go back now to the other client,
type that in, and then I
can go back to the console,
and we can see that it's still running.
Alright, so that's the basics
of working with sockets.
Now, before we move on to UDP,
I wanna discuss timeouts, briefly.
Now, when a client is
communicating with a server,
it doesn't wanna block forever.
If the server's gone
down, or it isn't sending
a response for some other reason,
then the client will want
to report back to the user,
otherwise the user's gonna
think the application's frozen,
or it's just died for some reason.
So what we can do is, we can
actually set a timeout period
on a socket, and the idea
here is that if a socket
doesn't respond within the timeout,
then we get a java.net.socket
timeout exception thrown.
So let's actually try that out.
We're gonna set a timeout for the client.
So I'm gonna leave the server running,
and open up the client code.
And what we wanna do is
change this code here,
of socket; at the moment, we've got socket
local host 5,000.
Below that, before the buffered reader,
we can type socket dot set
S-O timeout,
and we'll do 5,000 for five seconds.
So again, we're setting a
timeout of five seconds here,
and we'll need to handle the
socket timeout exception.
In this case, we're gonna
terminate the application,
but in the real world, it
will depend on the situation.
So you might wanna, for example,
try sending the request again.
You might want to abort
that particular action,
and inform the user, or, perhaps
you just might wanna
terminate the application.
You might wanna give the user a choice,
so there's a couple of
options there, basically.
But for this demo app,
what we're gonna do is,
we're gonna add a catch block
to the existing try block,
and we're gonna catch the
exception outside the loop,
and then terminate the client application.
So down here, we're actually gonna catch
a socket timeout exception, e,
and then we're just going
to print out a message
to the console, the socket timed out.
And we're gonna leave the
other I-O exception in there,
as it was before.
And what we're gonna do then
is go back to the server code,
and I commented this out before,
let's put that code in that actually
makes things sleep for 15 seconds.
Put that code back in.
And we'll actually stop this server.
And we'll just run it again.
And we'll actually take
off the break point
this time as well.
So again, what we've done
here, is, we've re-enabled
the server sleep code so
that the server thread
sleeps for 15 seconds.
So, we restarted the server, and are about
to start the client, and again, we've set
the client socket timeout to five seconds.
You can see that on line 16.
And the server sleeps for 15 seconds
each time the client sends a request.
So consequently, the
socket should timeout,
and the socket timeout
exception should be thrown.
So let's actually see whether that works.
And I'm just gonna close this
down as well, and start again.
Then, we'll run our client again.
So I'm gonna type in Tim,
and just leave it, and see what happens.
And you can see there, we
got the socket timed out.
Notice also, that the
client also terminated.
So, using timeouts is
a very important tool,
and it prevents a client
from blocking forever.
Alright, so that's all for TCP/IP.
In the next video, we're
gonna start taking a look
at another protocol, UDP,
which stands for user datagram protocol.
So, I'll see you in the next video.